Pocketcrypt examples
====================

To compile these example tools within the source tree, run

  make tools

and to install them into $HOME/bin (for example), use

  make install-tools BINDIR=$HOME/bin

For simplicity, this code assumes getentropy() is available to securely
generate keys/nonces, and that the kernel will not leak memory contents
after a process exits.


Key generation
--------------

To generate an X25519 keypair, run

  keypair SK PK

This writes a 32-byte secret scalar and 32-byte public identity to files SK
and PK respectively. The scalar is uniformly distributed modulo the order
of the base point and divisible by the cofactor 8, so it safely annihilates
any torsion component during key exchange. It is invariant under RFC 7748
clamping for ease of interoperation with other tools and libraries.


Authenticated encryption
------------------------

To encrypt data from the secret key in keyfile SK to the public identity in
keyfile PK, use

  encrypt SK PK

supplying the plaintext on stdin. This writes encrypted data (comprising a
16-byte random nonce followed by 65536-byte ciphertext chunks, each with a
16-byte authentication tag) to stdout.

To authenticate and decrypt data sent from the public identity in keyfile PK
to the secret key in keyfile SK, run

  decrypt SK PK

supplying the encrypted data on stdin. Decrypted plaintext chunks are
written to stdout only once authenticated. If authentication fails,
decryption aborts with an error and the invalid plaintext is not released.

Encryption and decryption are implemented as streaming operations: running
authentication tags are emitted after every 65536-byte chunk of ciphertext
as well as at the end of the stream. Without these, decryption would need
to buffer the entire stream until the final tag is verified, to avoid
releasing unauthenticated plaintext.

The stream will always end with one chunk shorter than 65536 bytes. If the
plaintext is a multiple of 65536 bytes long, an empty final data chunk is
authenticated to distinguish premature truncation from real end-of-stream.

For keypairs (a, A) and (b, B), the same shared secret abG results from aB
and bA. Messages can therefore be encrypted and decrypted using either the
sender's secret or the recipient's secret, making them repudiable: anyone
who can decrypt and authenticate a message could also have forged it.


Anonymous encryption
--------------------

To encrypt data anonymously to the public identity in keyfile PK, use

  encrypt PK

supplying the plaintext on stdin. This writes a 32-byte ephemeral identity
to stdout, followed by 65536-byte ciphertext chunks and their 16-byte
authentication tags.

To authenticate and decrypt data sent anonymously to the secret key in
keyfile SK, run

  decrypt SK

supplying the encrypted data (ephemeral identity, ciphertext chunks and
their tags) on stdin. Decrypted plaintext chunks are written to stdout only
once authenticated. Otherwise, decryption aborts with an error.


Signatures
----------

To sign data on stdin using the secret key in keyfile SK and optional
corresponding public identity PK, run

  sign SK [PK]

The 64-byte signature is written to stdout. If PK is not supplied, it is
calculated from SK at the cost of an additional scalar multiplication.

To verify a signature file SIG corresponding to the public identity in
keyfile PK, use

  verify PK [SIG]

passing the signed data on stdin. SIG is optional: if it is omitted, the
64-byte signature is read from stdin before the message. If verification
fails, an error is returned.

These signatures use Ed25519-style deterministic nonces as described in the
Pocketcrypt documentation. This eliminates the risk of reusing an ephemeral
key and the need for unbiased entropy during signing.


Secret sharing
--------------

To divide a 32-byte keyfile SECRET into 33-byte share files, run

  keysplit THRESHOLD SECRET SHARE...

where 0 < THRESHOLD < 256 is the minimum quorum required to reconstruct the
secret. It must not exceed the total number of shares.

To recombine a set of share files into a keyfile SECRET, use

  keymerge SECRET SHARE...

If too few shares are provided, a random secret will be derived. This error
case is not detected.
